---
layout: post
title:  What’s So Problematic About ‘Problematic’?
date:   2025-06-19 21:30:00
description: Week 2 entry for NYT summer writing contest
tags: NYT
categories: posts
hidden: false
---

### What’s So Problematic About ‘Problematic’?
<br/>
	In eighth grade, I poured my heart into crafting a story about a girl’s journey of self-discovery and transformation. It was an adventure filled with introspection and reflection on her past. While only an outline, I had already envisioned so much more. I saw real potential in this idea—unlike all the others I had scrapped—and I was genuinely proud of what I had created.
Then, in an offhand comment, a classmate said, “Isn’t that like, really edgy?” Just like that, without any explanation, one casual remark made me question all my hard work, even though I didn’t fully understand what the comment meant. Suddenly, the story I had spent so much time building felt like a mistake waiting to be judged. So I abandoned it, and instead, wrote something lighthearted, with a stereotypical theme and a forgettable plot—like all the others—because it felt safer. It felt easier to blend in than to risk being called “edgy.”
John McWhorter’s column on the word problematic helped me understand why that moment stuck with me. He explains how certain words—problematic included—have evolved into vague and judgmental labels. They aren’t harsh words by themselves, but when used carelessly, they become linguistic stop signs, signaling who or what is acceptable without offering clarity and critique. Words like problematic, or casual terms like “edgy” or “weird,” can carry more weight than their simple definitions suggest. Adults might brush them off, able to distinguish a harmless joke from a real criticism. But to kids who were still figuring out their voice, those words can land hard, making creativity feel dangerous. The impact isn’t always in what’s said, but in what’s left unsaid. When language is used as a weapon without explanation, it stifles growth instead of encouraging it, building invisible walls that isolate.
McWhorter reminds me that language can shape reality by altering people’s choices. If words are meant to “throw forward” ideas, they shouldn’t bounce back as shame. They should be lights that illuminate the path to understanding and new beginnings. In an ideal world, I believe words should build, not break, and language can spark growth, not silence. If the young are to flourish and develop to become the great minds running our future society, we must nurture their ideas with care and open more doors with our words.
<br/>
